# AFM 362

** Exam mostly focuses on calculations and deadlines

## L1 & 2: RIGHTS & OBLIGATIONS (Chapters 1 & 14)

- deduction = income that CRA does not wish to tax (deductions from net income before tax)
- taxable income = net income – deductions
- credit = incentives for actions that govt wishes people to take (refunds from taxable income)
- tax liability = (net income – deductions) * tax rate – tax credits

### DIVISIONS

- A = NS
- B = rules regarding net income
  - sub division A = employment income
  - deductions:
      - sec 8 = deductions allowed against employment income (RPP contributions, RRSP contributions)
      - generally, any expense made by you the employee is *not* allowed except specific items, such as:
        - union dues
        - office rent or home office expenses
        - supplies
      - employer withholdings are *not deductible* but rather treated as *credits* (part of Div E)
- C = rules regarding deductions
- D = NS
- E = rules regarding tax rates and credits

#### Example

*During 2019, Mr. Barnett has employment income of 90,000, capital gain 10,000. The tax rate applicable to him is 15%. He has medical and charity tax credit totaling 1,000.*

Division B outlines the rules for calculating the taxable capital gains (only 50%) and employment income (100%)

Division E determines the 15% tax rate and the eligible medical and charity credits

### OBJECTIONS

- Individuals: file Notice of Objection within later of: 90 days after NOA mail date OR one year after filing due date (ie. usually Apr 30)
- Corporations: Within 90 days after NOA mail date
- T2200 (states what out-of-pocket expenses must be paid to perform your job) filled and signed by employer

- can file NOOBJ online, through representative, by mail, or in person at a tax services office or tax center.

### TAX INSTALMENTS

- Must pay instalments if your CY non-withheld tax liability > $3,900 *and* you PY non-withheld tax liability of *one* of the past two years > $3,000
- For Quebecers, it's $1,800

#### Chapter 14 Page 869 Example

An individual living in a province that's not Quebec had total tax liability on income not subject to withholding:

1. $2,900 in 2017
1. $3,100 in 2018
1. $3,300 in 2019

- in 2017 his CY tax liability < $3,000; didn't have to pay instalments
- in 2018, his CY tax liability > $3,000 but it didn't reach $3,000 in either of the two previous years; didn't have to pay instalments
- in 2019, his CY tax liability > $3,000 and one of the two previous years he also had tax liability > $3,000 (ie. in 2018); he has to pay instalments in 2019.

### CALCULATING INSTALMENTS

For individuals, three ways to calculate tax instalments:

1. CY Option: For each Q, pay 1/4 of instalment
1. PY Option
1. 2nd PY Option: For Q1 and Q2, 1/4 of non-withheld tax liability from two years ago; for Q3 and Q4, 1/2 of (PY – (Q1 + Q2 payments))

Option 2 and 3 will result in the same *total* instalment payments each year.

But! Option 1 is dangerous because if you underestimate your tax liability (and as a result don't pay enough instalments), you are liable for interest. If you use Option 2 or 3, you are safe from interest and penalties even if your actual liability turns out to be higher than prior years.

For corporations, Option 3: For M1 and M2, 1/12 of liability from two years ago; for M3–M12, 1/10 of (PY – (M1 + M2 payments))

** Interest and penalty calculations don't need to be memorized

#### Chapter 14 Assignment Problem 6

1. $3,750
1. Option 2: 5,753
1. 4,502 for M1 and M2; $6,003.20 for M3–M12

### INTEREST RATES

- Late payment of taxes (you owe CRA): 6%
- If CRA owes you (overpayment) as a corporation: 2%
- If CRA owes you (overpayment) as a non-corporate (individual) taxpayer: 4%

### CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MISREPRESENTATION

#### Chapter 14 Assignment Problem 8

No correct answer

- on one hand, as an accounting professional he is reasonably expected to realize the amount of income reported is too low. he seems to be indifferent (since he asked no further questions) of whether or not the neighbour is defying the law. he could be found guilty of gross negligence
- on the other hand, he relied in good faith on information provided by his neighbour (that the neighbour had no other income), and he did not exhibit culpable (ie. intentional) conduct.

## L3: Employment Income

### Division B Subdivision A: Employment Income Inclusions and Deductions


  - calculated on cash basis, not accrual (which is for corporations)
  - inclusions:
    - salary, wages, gratuities
    - sec. 6 = other income inclusions arising from employment (benefits, company-provided car, EI benefits, reimbursement for food and board, life insurance premium paid by employer, etc.)
    - sec. 7 = stock option benefits
    - note: employer's RPP contributions are *not* taxable; neither are health insurance premiums paid by employer (treated as human basic right; you should therefore not be taxed on it)

allowance and reimbursement are the same technically, just timing is different, but both are eventually paid by the employer on employee's behalf, thus can potentially be part of your employment income.

### RPP ()

- employee's contribution is *deductible*
- employer's matched amount is *taxable*; cannot be deducted from income

deduction is limited to 18% of employee's earnings

RRSP (employer has nothing to do with this; only employee will ever contribute to RRSP; even if unemployed, you can still add to RRSP of your own free will)

#### Example

correct answer: $122,000

- if you benefit most from the expense, it is likely *not deductible* (eg. company-paid vacation); if you do not really personally benefit but rather it is necessary for work, it is likely *deductible* (eg. salesperson's car expenses)
-

#### Example

- *Professional due paid by the employee to CPA Canada.* Can be deducted because the expense is work-related.
- *Gym membership paid by the employer.* Included in income because the expense largely benefits employee rather than for work purposes.
- *Business trip paid by the employer.* Can be deducted because the expense is work-related.
- *Home internet paid by the employee.* Unless for home office, the expense benefits the employee, is not related to work, therefore cannot be deducted.

### STOCK OPTIONS

= the right to purchase shares at a given price (lower than market price)

- exercise price = price that you are able to purchase shares at (which is lower than market price)
- FMV at exercise = market price of shares when shares are exercised
- price of disposition = price that you eventually sell the shares at

the discount of your purchase is part of your employment income.

- exercise price – FMV = included in your employment income
- price of disposition - FMV at exercise = capital gains; not relevant to employment income

- if working for public corporation: must include the discount in the employment income of the year that the shares are exercised
- if working for CCPC, has a benefit: can defer recognition of the discount *until disposition of shares*

#### Div C deduction for stock options

= 1/2 of employment income from stock options can be deducted if:

- from public corp: cannot be in-the-money
- from CCPC: must hold for at least two years before exercising (doesn't matter if it's in-the-money)

- in-the-money: exercise price is already lower than FMV *on the day the options are granted* (not exercise date)
  - ie. if you exercise them right away on the same day as they are granted, you're guaranteed to make money
- out-of-money: on the grant date, the exercise price is higher than FMV
- at-the-money: exercise price = exercise price *is the same as* FMV on the grant date
  - this is the *most common type of stock option* (eg. a company grants stock options at the market price today, the assumption is you will hold onto them for a while as they gain value, then when you exercise them, you will be able to buy at a discount)


#### Example: *5 options to purchase 20 shares each at $12. FMV at grant date is $10. Exercise when FMV is $15. Sell when FMV is $19.*

this is an out-of-money stock option grant.

must use 15 instead of 12 for tax base of capital gain calc, otherwise employment income will be taxed twice

*Tax implications for a public corporation?*

Div C

*For a CCPC?*

### AUTOMOBILE BENEFITS

- standby charge
  - A/B * (2% * (C*D) + 2/3 * (E–F))
  - A/B
    - if personal use is more than 50%, A/B = 1
    - if personal user is less than 50%, A/B = personal km / 20,0004 km (average distance driven in a year, given by CRA)
  - 2% = CRA says for each month you use the vehicle, you consume ~2% of its value (therefore you must be taxed on the 2%)
  - C*D
- operating benefit
  - for each km driven, 28 cents of benefits paid by employer to you (changes every year)
  - if personal use is more than 50%, use above formula (28 * personal use km driven)
  - if personal use is less than 50%, can use operating benefit calculation OR 1/2 of standby charge

the worst is if you drive a car for like 10 km and 8 of those are personal use, then you'll end up paying a lot of tax for barely any personal benefit

also, you'll be taxed a lot more if you use it slightly more for personal use than business use

what is *you the employee* own the vehicle, but your employer reimburses you for operating costs?

- pro-rate based on personal use / total use ratio

#### Example:

Jane

### RPP DEFINED BENEFIT VS DEFINED CONTRIBUTION

defined benefit (benefit to you the employee is the same regardless of plan performance)

- big risk for employer because if plan investment does poorly in the market, they must still pay you the same amount
- employer may lose money if investment is bad

defined contribution aka money-purchase (more commonly used, it's less expensive for the employer):

- risk is taken on by employee—market decides how much your RPP earns, employer doesn't have to make it up to you if the investment is bad
- if plan performs poorly, the employee is paid less
